Trees, which I wasn't used to.
But it was, you know, just like the feel of the campus, it wasn't the same feeling I got at the University of Texas.
And for somebody from Pampa, that was probably a much better, comfortable place.
And I went out to the baseball game, as I said, and I saw how the students supported the team and everything, and I thought, you know, I really was...
I didn't make the decision then, but it really had an impression on me.
I didn't know it at the time, but I probably did, but I went back and spent a couple months wrestling with it, and I picked the time I was going to decide, and I remember a University of Texas coach came up to me and said, I was down in Houston,
competing in the National Federation meet against Danny Roberts and some other guys.
And I won the meet with 57 feet, which is 58 feet.
And that's wrong again.
I threw 60 feet, which is the first time a Texan had thrown 60.
And that was the Father in the Southwest Conference record.
And so the coach came up to me after that and said, you know, you need to make your decision because people are starting to wonder if you're trying to wait and see who's going to make you the best deal, which embarrassed me.
And then he said, you know, I hate to say this because in Texas, but, you know, with your potential, you probably ought to go to Southern California.
So I guess he'd figured out I wasn't going to the University of Texas then.
And I said, okay, I'm going to go home and do that.
And as soon as I got home, I called Coach Thomas to come if he wanted to or send me papers, whatever.
I was ready to come to A&M.
I called Coach Thomas.
It was kind of difficult because the Kansas coach,
named Bill Easton, who was one of the great coaches, and I did visit the University of Kansas also, and they had a guy named Al Orter, and then a guy named Bill Nieder, who was a shot put champion, but really wasn't interested in going to Kansas.
He flew home with me and stayed in my, get up early in the morning and come to the house and sit in the front room all day where nobody else could get in.
At the time I called Coach Thomas, I had him sitting in the front room and two Oklahoma State coaches, basketball coaches, in a car outside.
And so I finally went and told them I'm going to go to A&M, and they scattered pretty fast.
Was there a day then, a signing day, like there is now?
It was already past that.
Oh, okay.
You could sign in those days when you're sport, like the state meet.
But I did my visiting, you know, most of it after the state meet.
So anyway, it was pretty anticlimactic.
I remember there was a sports writer who was the dean of Texas sports writers named Ratliff and he had, they'd drive me crazy calling me and he called and said look I'm not going to bother you.
He was with AP, Associated Press, he said if you would call, would you call me?
He gave me a number.
And I said, yes, sir, I will.
He's the only one that asked me to do that.
The rest of them just call every day.
And so I went in there and said, after I called Coach Thomas and called and said, I just called Coach Thomas, told him I was going to A&M.
And he said that was the only athlete he ever had to do that.
And because of that, he never wrote a bad article about me, no matter how bad I did.
Until all the way through my career, he reminded me of that, you know.
But it was an interesting time.
It was a real stressful time for me and my family.
You don't have to be specific about this.
Did any individual or school make any offer or promise that was clearly illegal?
You know, I don't remember that.
really ever happening, you know.
It was a different era.
Yeah, and I think probably, I think then it was a little more of the athletes had to ask for it a little bit maybe, I don't know, you know, I knew there was a lot of those things that went on and even at A&M in those days, you know, when they got to A&M because we spent, it's obvious because we spent a couple times on probation back in those days, especially in football, basketball, but track and field there wasn't that much because, you know, it was a
non-revenue type sport.
Let's see, did SC, did you meet John Wayne or OJ?
No, I didn't meet OJ because he wasn't a big star then.
He was on their track team while I was at A&M.
He transferred from Virginia College about that time and he was a good track man.
I was wondering if they rolled out any movie stars.
You know, I went to Disneyland.
I remember getting to go out there and one of the guys took me around to see that.
But I don't remember doing any movie star thing.
They did tell me, which is legal.
I said, well, you know, I'm not going to be able to afford to go home, you know, holidays and stuff.
And they said, no, we'll get you a job as a second.
I mean, as a...
Not a second is in these movies.
Oh, a bit player.
Yeah, well, no, just somebody in a crowd, you know, and there was some kind of scale, you know, that they paid those people to go out and stand in a crowd, and we do that sometimes.
It was interesting.
They had a work rule in the Pac-10 in those days that you had to work, partially work for your scholarship, and I was real interested in what that was going to be.
And they said, well, you'll have to keep the area around your shot put ring clean, you know, pick up your papers.
I think I can do that, you know.
So anyway, it was a lot different then.
All right, and your decision to come to A&M
was track, not, you didn't, at that point, you didn't talk to any of the coaches?
They were talking to me about basketball.
I basically told them I wasn't gonna play football, even though Coach Vollberg talked to me about football.
He was a football coach and athletic director.
I had one request that I asked for, and I said I wanted assurances
that I had a place to train all the time.
And Coach Fullberg, who had his own pilot's license, flew out to Pampas, sat there, he said, you want it in riding?
How do you want it?
I said, just tell me.
I got Malcolm Douglas right there.
Just tell me that I'll have a place
to lift weights and do the training, because there was something else that happened to me when I was here for my visit that I had overlooked that was probably as key to anything we'd come into A&M as they took me over to the P.E.
Department and I met a guy named Emil Mameliga, who was a professor of kinesiology, had been a diver at Ohio State, and he looked at me and said, man, I can put about
two inches on your arms, four inches on your legs.
I was growing while he was talking to me.
He said, you can't launch a big shell from a PT boat.
You've got to be a battleship.
That's a good one.
And he said, but we're not going to affect your athletic ability.
We're going to utilize that.
And he said, I'm going to personally work with you.
So that had a big influence on me because...
That was what I was lacking.
By then, technically, I understood the shot fairly well for someone my age.
I kind of knew what I wanted to do.
I'd studied a lot.
Not that I knew it all, but I kind of knew I didn't want some coach trying to take me and rebuild me technically then, but I needed somebody to help make me stronger in that part of it.
And that had a big influence on me.
And as my career progressed, was probably the most important
thing that happened to enable me to accomplish what I had hoped to in track and field.
Now on that Saturday you were here they also brought you over to Nagel Hall and you met two or three faculty members.
Yeah and that was one the only illegal recruiting deal they ever really did at A&M.
They said we're going to walk through the campus and we're going to say I want you to meet some typical faculty member at A&M.
So I go we go into Nagel Hall which my son now goes to he's working on a PhD in the
genetics or something over there, and that's where I took him over the other day, and I said, that's a bunch of history professors in there.
He informed me that they didn't have any history professors in there anymore.
Anyway, we're walking through there, and they stick our head in some office, and there's some young professor in there by the name of Haskell Monroe, and he just gives me the biggest sales pitch on how great a place it is.
I didn't go to A&M, and he told me,
about all the shot putters they'd had and discus throwers.
And they said, that's just typical professor at A&M.
Well, I never had one like it.
Most of them didn't even like athletics after I got in their classes.
But that was the only probably illegal recruiting thing that happened to me at A&M.
Well, there was one other.
If you're ready to get on into my A&M years, but after when I first showed up to campus,
They put me in, when I visited, we stayed in Henderson Hall, which at that time was one of the premier athletic dorms in the country, but it was for football and basketball.
They didn't bother to tell me that while I was here.
They put me in a room, and when I showed up and said I'm just going to be mainly a track guy, they put me in Henderson Hall.
Well, I can't find a track guy.
I mean, we came in a week early, go through orientation, I can't find a track guy anywhere.
And so I finally go, you know, go down and ask them, where are the track guys?
Well, they don't stay.
They're over in Hart Hall, which was a non-air-conditioned old dorm right in the middle of the campus, over by Nagel Hall, as a matter of fact.
And I said, well, I'm not going to stay in here if the track team's over there, so I'm going to move.
So they moved me, but Hart Hall wasn't ready, so they moved me over into Law Hall.
And it was a non-air condition, and it had a bunk bed.
And of course, they had seven-foot beds in Henderson, and I didn't have a sheet, so I slept on a mattress with no pillow.
And the next day, I called my dad and said, you know, I don't know if this deal's going to work out too good.
And he said, well, the Southern Cal coach called today and said, if you do not go to class, it's not too late.
So my roommate, Don Ayers, who came down with me, they said he could room with me.
He called over there, Coach Thomas wasn't in, Coach Metcalf was in.
Said, I think Randy's gonna go to leaving.
He's gonna, he's unhappy.
I mean, he can't sleep and you know, and the bed was too low.
So Metcalf came over and said, where do you want to go?
I said, I want to go to the, where the truck guys are at.
That's all I'm asking, you know.
So the dorm wasn't open then.
So he went over and got a key, got in, which room you want.
Well, I got a senior corner room.
I didn't know that was a senior room,
It didn't have a bed in it.
He went over and stole a bed out of Henderson Hall, seven-foot bed.
It wouldn't fit up the ramps of Hart Hall, so he got ropes, him and the assistant coach, Coach Culpepper, and they pulled it up, all of us.
And then he says, it's still kind of hot in here.
There's no air conditioning.
So he went over to the athletic department, stole a fan out of the offices.
and brought it over there and, as a matter of fact, got in trouble about it later because it had a university ID on it and wonder where I got that fan.
Metcalf couldn't remember ever giving it, taking it over there.
But that's how I got in Hart Hall.
And if that hadn't worked out, I might have gone to Southern Cal.
How did you, you worked in the oil field that summer in the Pampa area.
Well, I actually worked for the Pioneer Natural Gas, I guess.
In town?
In town.
All right, and then how did you get down here that fall?
Don Ayers, who was coming with me, and another longtime high school buddy of mine, Travis Tucker, he had a two-door Chevrolet Monza that his parents let him bring.
And we put most of what we brought in the back of that car and the three of us came down.
Now, A&M was a lot different in those days and so, and Travis was going in the course.
He was a little apprehensive.
We
Every time we'd go through, we never could get a consensus on turning around and going home because we'd always stop and discuss what our options were if we went home, which would be working in oil fields or something.
At one time, there was always one or two that still wanted to go home, but it changed from town to town.
But we made the college station a week early and got moved in.
Did you go through freshman orientation and all that?
They didn't have all that.
They had some things.
That's when you took your tests, you know, your placement tests they call them and everything.
You did a lot of that and you had the registration and all then.
So you really didn't, you know, I don't think we had much of an orientation.
I'm sure we had some kind.
I do remember that one of the benefits of being an athlete is basically the academic counseling they gave you in those days is they let you in the side door of Sabisa Dining Hall where registration took place maybe five minutes early where you could get a run on getting your schedule set up where you could block in your workout time.
Now the football players got to go in first and then, you know, it was a pecking order.
but we got in a little bit early, and that's how you got to get your schedule.
All right, back in high school, summarize your academic preparation.
Well, I had probably, even though no one in my family had ever gone to college, I probably,
had in mind to go to college very early on.
I had good teachers in Pampa, and I don't know how that would stack up today.
I think I had about a 92 average in high school in those days, and I was in the National Honor Society.
I did not take the most rigorous path.
I avoided chemistry,
and anything like that that had a lot of math and stuff in it in those days.
What were your best courses?
Well, probably the histories and probably more liberal art type courses, even though I may not have enjoyed some of the English and some of the literature part so much.
I think my strong point was reading and comprehension probably more than it was with math.
And nobody took a SAT?
I don't think so.
I remember asking Ed Cooper one time when we were really starting to pay attention to SAT scores around here, and I said, did we do anything like that?
And he said, yeah, I think you did.
I said, can you go back and find out how we did it?
And he said, you don't want to know.
So I never knew whether he really checked it and saw that I wouldn't want to know, or he just said, you don't want to know.
I think under today's guidelines, I would have had the high school record would have been all right.
I think I would have had a hard time making on the test score, well above what they require for athletes.
I would think I would have probably because... How many in your senior class at Pampin?
We had a good size.
We were the largest classification 4A, and I want to say 300.
Do you know, you were in the top quarter?
I was in the top 10%.
Top 10%, okay.
That's what I thought.
And so, but as far as the test score, because of the math and stuff that I kind of avoided,
I probably would not have done real well on it.
Did you declare major that first semester?
Yes.
What?
Business, marketing.
Because the way you kind of did it in those days, you got the catalog and you said, all right, what math courses you marked in the yellow marker, all the math and science, and that was about the least amount.
What did you think that was going to lead to?
I thought I'd go into work in a bank or real estate or something like that.
And did you seek any advice at home or that first semester, academic?
No, there wasn't much advice in those days.
And so when you first, what were your first impressions as you went to class of the academics?
Well, we were scared to death, you know, when we came.
and we didn't know what to expect and any of them had a reputation of weeding a lot of people out in their first year so I mean we were scared so we studied hard and uh and I think we were on a three point then and I think I had a two four or something like that the first semester you know and I said this isn't as hard as I thought then after the second semester I had to get back to some kind of it went the other way so I kind of had to get back to some
steady course, but we were so scared that first semester.
And my roommate, Donnie Ayers, who was good academically, he had a brother as a medical doctor and a brother as an optometrist that were older than him and left a pretty good, and his mother was a school teacher, and so he had high expectations.
He really had to do well, and my parents didn't, my parents didn't graduate from high school, so there was a
They did not put pressure on me that way, you know, and so I didn't have the kind of pressure he had, you know, and so, but I just followed him around, you know, we'd come back to the dorm and study in between classes and all kind of crazy stuff, which was unheard of after that, you know, but when you left home, did mom and dad give you any advice or words that were
You know, I don't remember that.
You know, I think they left me with the feeling that, you know, if this thing doesn't work out, you can come home, you know, but, you know, go to work.
I don't think we were close, and so I think they were probably a little sad that I was going off, you know, but...
And did you write to them that first semester, did you write to them often or call them?
I wrote some, and then we didn't have a phone in those days, and they finally put a phone in my room because the reporters were all calling and couldn't find me, so the athletic department paid for a phone because I wouldn't go call them back.
I didn't want, you know, go down the lounge.
You couldn't get a phone.
All the only phones in the end were over at MSC, and pay phones are in the lounge, so they finally put a
put a phone in my room and which probably is illegal now I guess but people have phones but I you know they paid for it because the reporters were looking for me.
I remember a couple of times my roommate would would do interviews and they didn't know who they were talking to because radio was a big deal in those days and so
all these radio guys would call you, sports, did sports on radio, and they'd call you on a little, you know, two-minute interview before a track meet, you know, and you'd get a dozen of them.
So he just started doing them for me.
Now, describe, if you can, the first semester academically, classes and what the routine was and so forth.
Well, that's been a long time ago, but I came in kind of scared.
And this is the fall of 60?
63.
and so as I said I was fairly successful in one of my best semesters because I was nervous about it and it was a big transition for me.
Did you have any special teachers that you think back?
Well I can't remember back some of our you know my early teachers one of them was a history
professor that I thought, man, I'm really in good shape.
And I think it might have been my second semester that I had him.
A fellow by the name of Vic Treat.
I had him.
And he was an old half-miner from the University of Houston.
I thought, man, I'm in good shape.
And I think I might have made a B in there.
It might have been a C because I didn't do too well the first test.
I remember when I got behind, I knew that right away.
He didn't care whether I was a track guy or not.
But, you know,
Most of the, I felt pretty good about most of my teachers I had in.
And you went to class right now?
I was afraid not to go to class.
I went to class and generally tried to set up and pay attention and do all those things.
I was kind of afraid not to.
I really,
I thought that was kind of an important thing.
I felt like as an athlete I needed to work a little harder than that because there was a perception maybe that athletes were dumb and got special treatment and couldn't make it otherwise.
Were you freshman athletes in the Corps?
Everyone was in the core actually in ROTC.
Athletes were not in the core, most of them.
There were some guys that lived in core dorms and participated, but most scholarship athletes were required to live in the athletic dorms and not be in the core, but they had to take ROTC.
So y'all didn't have to wear uniforms?
Just to drill and ROTC class.
I had an interesting experience because I wasn't against it, but I had some real questions about the core business, because I didn't have any kind of military background, and when I was being recruited,
I said, no, I don't want to get up every morning in March and do all that when I need to work out in the evenings.
And they said, no, you go to class, you know, and that.
And I said, well, that's not a problem.
I don't mind doing that.
And so they lined us all up that first week to get our uniforms.
And we're all lined up there.
And when I get up there, the guy looks up at me that's passing out the uniforms and says, how tall are you?
I'm 6'6 1â„2".
He said, we don't have anything that fits you.
And I said, well, then what do I do?
He said, well, the height limit is 6'6", so you don't have to be in ROTC.
You're not in the draft, you know.
So I don't have to do any of this?
He said, no.
I said, okay, I'm gone.
And I walked out and everybody said, where were you going?
You know, the football players all lined up.
I said, if you're over 6'6", you don't have to do this.
So them guys were stretching and trying to get up there, you know, because it was kind of unknown what this ROTC business meant.
As it turned out, it would have been a good experience.
I wished I'd have done it.
just for that part of it because two years later they raised the limit to 6-8 for the draft, which made me eligible for the draft.
And so all those guys that went to ROTC class now had a chance to go in as lieutenants instead of privates like I was going to get to do.
And so it turned out I would have benefited from that limited training that they had to do.
Did you, freshman, get any kind of hazing?
Was there any kind of baloney in the eardorm?
There was a little bit, but not too much in athletics.
And the track guys never did bother me much, you know.
And go walk in a class sometimes, somebody might say something to you, but they could tell when you, usually when you didn't have a uniform on that you were, and you'd tell by looking at your athlete and they left you alone.
There were certain things though you were expected to do in honor, like, you know, no hat in the MSC, which all athletes were willing to do in those days.
Most people didn't wear hats in those days, except for the core guys, you know.
But we didn't walk on the grass in honor of all those kind of things.
And, you know, we respected the traditions and didn't, you know, try to violate too many.
As a matter of fact, we went to Yale practice sometime.
You know, in the evenings, once a week, I think they had a yell practice over in the stadium, and we'd go over there to yell practice sometimes.
Maybe it was just for something to do, didn't have much to do.
But I really benefited from, the atmosphere wasn't, we were called non-regs, you know, and it was kind of a derogatory thing.
When I competed, I really had support of the students.
And when I came back to class, they knew what I'd done and were interested in what I'd done.
And the faculty, too, professors.
I had one professor of geology later on.
I wasn't really interested in geology, but I had to take a science.
And it was an interesting story.
His name was F.E.
Smith, Fred Smith.
And he had, in class, he pointed out to the class, our first day, who I was.
And he says, it's interesting, because when I was at the University of Southern California, I had a guy named Perry O'Brien in my class.
And then when I was at LSU, I had a guy named Jack Torrance who was a former world record holder.
And if Mr. Madsen would do well, at that time I did not have the record.
And he used to write on the board what he thought I was going to do that week.
And I took a lot of ribbing from the class because, you know, I mean, this professor, you got it made.
You don't have to do anything, you know.
But he was kind of a tough old guy that, you know, you respected.
So when I would have to go, as a matter of fact he wrote 70 feet on there, and when I threw it he just erased it.
He didn't say much about it, but I threw it while he was teaching, you know.
But I remember one time I'd go in and
and I made a point to do this and I don't know maybe somebody told me or whatever but I'd go on about Wednesday or something and go you can find your professor that day and I'd go in the office and say look I got a track meet Friday and I'm leaving and you got a test you want me to do it before after how you want me to do it you know it's it's whatever you you know and you know you usually have to take it earlier and
And it was at a disadvantage sometimes because sometimes they didn't, you know, they were nervous about getting out so they didn't give you a different test or something.
But I remember going to see him one time and he handed me the test.
And I said, well, what am I supposed to do?
He said, well, bring it back when you get done.
Well I didn't know whether he was trying to say here go make 100 on it, you know, and so I went back and I said if I don't I'll probably make about 85 because this geology stuff's kind of hard.
And he's going to think that's the dumbest guy.
I mean I give him a test and he can't even do it.
But I went back and so I was afraid to look at anything so I made about 88 on it.
And he never said anything, you know.
But he was a good professor and, but I got a lot of support from the students and I really felt like that was real important.
That I wouldn't have had anywhere else.
They were interested in what I was doing and the faculty members too.
That first fall, do you remember going to the first
pep rally, yell practice, the first football games?
I don't remember a lot of that.
How did you and your buddies get into Aggie traditions and rituals?
You know, the first thing I remember is I went to a cross country race.
And the Aggies and Longhorns are coming across the finish line pushing and shoving and they have a fight after running three miles out there.
And I said you know this is intense stuff.
But I remember going to the games and you know we went to football games, wasn't anything else to do.
We went on a couple of road games but we went to basketball games in those days because that was a big happening you know.
Because you didn't have a whole lot to do other than study and as I got you know real
busy and active in the season, they didn't have time to do a whole lot.
Did Coach Solberg try to get you to play football that freshman year?
He really didn't.
He honored that.
What about Shelby and basketball?
Shelby didn't either.
Now I started out and they were kind of acting like they were expecting me to do it and I did it for a little while but
Mr. Mammalee had started me on a weight program that was about to kill me.
I mean I came in weighing 225 and after two weeks or after about a month I weighed about 215.
I went to see him and said this thing ain't working.
You know this is killing me.
I'm tired.
I go over to Hart Hall and I walk up a flight of stairs and sit down and rest and I walk up another until I get to the third floor, fourth floor.
It's killing me.
He said, now we're just getting rid of some baby fat, you know, even as light as you were.
And now we're starting to ready to build.
And by Christmas, I weighed 230.
So it did work.
And by the next September, I weighed right at 250, and I was in Tokyo at the Olympic Games.
And it was all because of that strength training.
And then eventually I got up to 267 pounds.
Did you start working out early in that first fall, working with the shot and the discus?
And where did you practice?
Well, I had a...
There was a discus ring behind the school board, cow field.
South end.
And you could throw down there and that was fine.
And the shot put ring was kind of on the edge of the football field.
And that was fine that first year.
Then when I went to the Olympics, then the next fall, so I was gone in the fall,
had to lay out of school because it was in October, and I got back and found out I couldn't throw the discus there anymore because football, they'd hired a new football coach, Gene Stallings, and they wanted to practice out near there, and it wasn't that I'd hit anybody, they just didn't want anybody out there, and then in the stadium, they didn't want the shot put ring in the stadium, except during the season, and Coach Fulberg was still the athletic director, and I had to remind them that I was the deal.
that I had, I'd have a place if it was midnight.
It doesn't have to be fancy, just I got a place to go work at.
Because I was told by other places that were trying to recruit me that you may not, football is such a big deal at A&M track.
Being in fear you probably wouldn't have a place to work out and that stuck in my mind.
So anyway, I just got back from the Olympics and I'm throwing the discus out there and a trainer comes up and tells me, one of the trainers that I knew,
I said, Coach Stilings, who I hadn't met, said, you can't throw here.
And I said, well, probably shouldn't have said it quite like this, but, you know, he's not my coach.